Attrition churn defection whatever you want to call it is essentially the loss of users or customers
in a given time period.
If you're an app attrition is when someone who has downloaded your app and previously used your app
stops using it or uninstall is it if your subscription service.
It's when a customer cancels on you.
So how is attrition defined.
Well attrition is equal to the users loss during a specific period of time divided by the users at the
beginning of that same period.
Notice that it says nothing about the users that are added during the period.
This is only about the users that you've lost.
So let's say you had a thousand users at the beginning of the month and at the end of the month you
lost 50 users.
So your churn for that month would be 50 divided by 1000 or 5 percent.
Even if you added 75 new users during that month.
Now let's say you lose another 50 users during the second month.
What is your attrition rate then.
Well your starting point for that month is different.
It was a thousand minus 50 plus 75.
So it's 1025 users.
So your attrition rate for the second month is 50 divided by one thousand twenty five or four point
nine percent.
Now this is more relevant for those of you who have users or customers who will be regularly interacting
with your product or service.
If you have a one and done type of business well this may not really apply to you.
So if you're selling a physical product this doesn't really apply.
So what does this mean in terms of our models.
Well it means that when you model the users your growth you're going to have to make some assumptions
about attrition as well.
So let's take a look.
By doing an example for a subscription business to grandmas cookies.
All right.
Let's look at a simple example with grandmas cookies.
It's a subscription service for cookies that are made by a grandmas recipe a different grandmas recipe
every month.
Okay.
And users subscribe for a monthly subscription and they get grandma's cookies once a month.
So let's assume that we have some projections for the first 24 months in terms of new customers.
OK.
Now the easiest way and the most common way a lot of you will assume attrition in modeling is they actually
just put in an attrition rate based on what they understood or what they've seen from a small sample
or whatever.
They have some reason to believe that their average expected attrition is something.
So if that's something that they want to go with then the attrition rate or the loss users is going
to be pretty easy to calculate.
So we have total users.
Right.
And then the lost user the actual attrition is just gonna be the attrition rate times the total customers.
And I'm rounding it here because it's better to lose a whole customer than to lose a half a customer.
Let me just then we'll just make that.
And then this is the attrition percentage for clarity.
OK so then for the other ones it's the same.
Right.
Then if we know we're adding new customers at this rate then the total customers is going to be the
previous total customers plus new customers gain minus what we lost.
And then we have the total customers.
So each time there's a little bit of staggering.
But then you get the idea here.
So this way with input it's really easy to calculate the attrition.
But what if you wanted to model attrition a different way way if you think on average a customer will
stay with the subscription for the cookies for six months and then after that they stop all of them
stops.
So let's see how that looks like in the model.
So let's look at the same thing.
Here is the same 24 months schedule in terms of new customer acquisitions but this time the attrition
is going to be 100 percent after six months.
So everybody stays on for six months and then afterwards they're done.
Right.
So in terms of the actual attrition the users that we lose if we're starting in month 1 and they're
all staying there then we're not losing anyone then in months 7 all of the new users from the first
month we assume we lose them.
Okay.
And then so if we copy the of all the way down then it staggered six months across like this.
The new users here their loss a month to their lost in month 8 and so forth until we get to the end.
So then now here the attrition percentages the attrition rate is zero for the first six months and then
it has some rate afterwards.
Right.
This one the attrition rate is going to be the average of the the new customer figures divided by the
total customers over time it should drop.
So over time this attrition rate is going to stabilize.
Right.
Because you're always losing 100 percent of your customers after six months.
This is also an easy way to model attrition but it's really also not very good just like the first version
here in the simple.
A better way to think about it is you know especially for a business like this is that there is probably
some sort of a schedule right now the opposite of attrition is retention.
What percentage of the customers are users you retain if we'd look at something like this where customers
once they come in we retain 100 percent of them after one month you lose some of them after the second
month and then you lose almost half of them after six months.
But the rest that stays stay for life.
So if that's the case how do we model that out now.
This one is a little bit more difficult.
So this one we need to track it for each cohort.
Right.
Because each month that they come in we need to track then for at least the six months for each of the
cohorts of new customers that are coming in.
So we've got to look at the cohorts here so we're doing 24 months and we're going to track 24 months
off of the cohorts so then we need the retention percentages for each of the corresponding months but
we needed from when that starts.
So in month 1 it's relatively straightforward.
Right.
It's just equal to that.
And we we copy the formula across and bam.
And you know we can do the same for months to make equal to that but it's kind of tedious.
So you could after you get comfortable with modeling you're gonna be able to do this.
Now let's model this formula looks a little complicated.
It's a little weird and wonky but what it does is it allows me to enter that one formula in here and
then when I copy and paste it across the rest of this it automatically finds the correct retention percentage
that starts in the correct month for that cohort.
So I briefly explain how this works.
Now first of all I need to use some month some figure to pull the correct number out of this.
This formula in Excel called each lookup.
It's called a horizontal lookup.
So if you have some key that it looks up.
So I need to generate some sort of a key.
The correct one two three four five six.
And then it searches the correct number from one of these here.
So basically I'm calculating some number that's going to be between 1 and 6.
For me I'm searching in this table which is this table right here.
And I want to pull the value that is two rows down toward each look and looks down like this.
And the faults here just means I want an exact match case that's too I want an exact match that helps
me to find look up the.
So the way I calculate that I have the month minus the previous cohort month here.
OK.
So then for each cohort when I have that then I have the correct one.
So in months to two minus the previous cohort one will give me one so then it will pull one hundred
percent fear and three in the second cohort.
That month three in the second cohort minus the previous cohort here one will equal to two.
So then I look up the ninety five.
Right.
So the logic here will work for all of this here.
Now the the stuff here in front is so that I I want everything else to be blank unless I'm in that correct
range of six months with those I don't want it to show other values here because if I just included
this look up what it does is if if it's not in the correct month it would just have an error and it
would kind of look messy on the on the screen.
I'll show you what that would look like if I say it took I took this row in I took if I took this code
out here and just left the calculation I would get this error here until I get to the correct months
it would calculate it.
Then the other parts would have these errors.
Right.
So the way to get rid of these errors there's an easy way and then there's a better way.
What I did was the more accurate way which is to find hey if it's outside of the range of these six
months then I wanted to show a blank in here.
That's where I did the check there.
OK.
Which is if the month is less than that range.
And also of the month that's more than the range that it's supposed to be for this particular cohort.
Then I want to show a blank.
Otherwise do the calculation and find the look.
Now another way to do that is instead of all of that there's another formula that we can use which is
called if error if there is an error don't show anything.
So what it does is try to do this but if there is an error then show that and it would give the same
result say that.
So there you go.
You just learn two techniques on how to do this somewhat complicated calculation.
There aren't that many cohorts here and there and then many months.
So it's really not that bad to have to do it manually if you're not comfortable with doing the formulas
yet but you know if you get in the situation where you're trying to do this for hundreds or maybe thousands
of cohorts then you're going to need to understand how to do that.
Right.
So feel free to take a look at the formula there's you know I'm going to leave this other formula here
like this for you so you can see the two different ways to generate the same result.
Now once we have the correct retention percentages for each of these cohorts then we can do a cohort
count of how many users from each cohort actually is staying through the months and the way we're going
to do that is we need to find the correct number of new customers that's added for that particular cohort.
Right.
So in the first cohort I want to pull the new customers that's coming from the first month.
And that's what this each look up here.
This part right here is doing okay.
And then I want to multiply it by the retention percentage.
Now this last part here is just to make sure that it only calculates in the range.
So it only does is look up in the range.
And then if there's any errors then we're going to make it look nice and show blinks.
This part here may be a little confusing in how it's executed in you may say Hey Simon that formula
is pretty clever.
You told us not to do clever stuff right.
True.
Now the only thing here is visually it's not clever right.
Visually you can tell if you look at it you know exactly what's going on.
So if the only time where you could get clever is if visually the results here is super obvious what
you're trying to do when clever gets in trouble is when it's clever like this.
And when you're looking at this it's not obvious what you're trying to do right.
It's just some numbers and everything is being calculated as well.
But here is pretty pretty obvious what's happening.
And same for here.
So that's the only time you can get clever.
All right.
So then we can actually calculate the attrition by cohort.
OK.
And here is basically just the difference between the cohort counts as we move down the month.
Right.
So there there's going to be some sort of attrition for each cohort for a period of six months that
follows this retention schedule.
And then afterwards there's going to be no more.
OK so then we have this cohort attrition schedule now for each cohort in for each month.
So then when we add it all up we have the attrition for each of those months.
So the actual user attrition is going to stabilize once you're getting it to more than six months because
then you're going to have some schedule right.
Each each part is they're seen with some if there's only five cohorts that are going to be going through
attrition at any given time.
Right.
So if if on average your cohorts are pretty stable then you you can expect your attrition to be relatively
stable.
Right.
But if you're increasing the amount of new users so each cohort is getting bigger and bigger over time
then your attrition number is going to get bigger over time as well.
But the percentage attrition the attrition rate is going to be getting smaller and smaller.
Because here we're assuming each cohort has some user segments they on forever.
So overall your user base as we can see here is going to be increasing over time and because that's
increasing over time and because the overall attrition numbers in any given month is limited to just
the attrition from five cohorts your actual attrition percentage is going to be getting smaller over
time and we see that here.
So there's different ways to look at attrition.
You know for modeling purposes for projection you can start with something like this just to have a
place value to know that you're accounting for attrition.
But once you have some data once you have cohort information once you have an idea you want to actually
you know for tracking you want to track it by cohort and by each thing are eaten by behaviors and that
way because if you do that and you notice that there's discrepancies in terms of the churn based on
your segments whatever they may be it may help you pinpoint what's going on.
Maybe there's some things that are causing a much higher churn for a segment of your users that where
you can actually address that.
All right.
Some final thoughts on attrition when we're modeling it.
We're projecting based on an assumption that you have no history you're going to have to make your best
guess based on what you know.
But if you have a history of figures maybe you've tested with some beta users and you have some historical
figures from three months of usage from the sample of beta users even then the thing to remember is
that your sample could be an outlier example.
Now this doesn't happen often but you do do something that is different for your initial set users.
They might be very different they might give you an attrition rate that is very different from what
you would actually see.
So then if you've projected based on that you could be really off one way or the other for our purposes
since we're starting with nothing.
We're just going to make a best guess but for most of you in practice as you get more data you have
more users you're going to be able to refine your attrition assumptions some folks will take multiple
samples and run what are called beta distributions that are aimed to estimate the true value of their
attrition based on the sample data the larger the samples the more confident they can be with the estimate
that they're using that it's close to the true value and when it comes to looking at attrition it is
often done with cohort studies or age group studies or even user segments by behavior.
When you look at attrition across different user segments it can help you pinpoint areas and understand
why attrition might be higher for a subgroup and not others.
Finally attrition could often be AKP Ira key performance indicator to measure and track if minimizing
attrition or reducing attrition is a key objective then.
This will definitely become a caveat.